Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we are going to learn how to read data from a database from within our node application.
So if we think back to the CRUD acronym in our previous lesson, we took care of the C in CRUD.
We created a new document in the database when a visitor submits this form.
And now in this lesson, let's focus on the R in CRUD and learn how to read data from the database.
Right.
We want to read or load the existing items in the database so we can display them here.
Now, before we learn how to do that, let's first make sure that we have multiple documents to experiment
with because at the moment I only have that one single document named by graps.
So right now let's do this together.
Let's submit this form a couple of more times just so we have multiple documents in our database to
practice reading in.
So in this form, I will say walk the dog and submit the form and then just click the button to go back
to that page and let's fill in the form one more time.
I will say buy coffee and submit the form.
Let's jump into our Mongo DB Atlas account just to confirm that those items were successfully created
in the database.
From this overview screen, click on collections.
Make sure that you select the correct database, so I'm interested in the one that's named to do and
expand that and let's click on the collection named Items.
Cool.
So those new items were successfully added.
We see total documents is three.
And down here we see by graps walk the dog and buy coffee.
All right.
So we now have multiple documents to work with.
Our goal now is to write a bit of code to load those items from within our node application so we can
display them to the user down here.
Let's make it happen.
So at this point, let's jump into our text editor and within our server JS file, we are looking for
the area of code where we tell our server what it should do if someone sends a request to the base,
you URL or the homepage.
In other words, we're interested in this section of code that begins with App Dot get for me.
It's on line 15.
It could be slightly different for you, but it's right below our app use line.
Right.
This is where we're saying if someone sends a get request and then the forward slash represents the
base you URL, well, then what are we going to do in response?
We're going to send back this HTML template that builds the homepage.
However, we no longer want to send back our response the millisecond this request comes in.
Now, instead, we want to first read data from a database and then wait until that database action
is complete and we have the data before we then actually send back our response.
So let's do this within the body of this function right before this response send line.
Let's just add a new line and let's talk to the database so we can use our DB variable that we set up
in our previous lesson.
And let's look inside it and call a method named collection in the parentheses, say quotes.
We are interested in the collection named items and then on this collection we want to perform a crud
operation.
So right at the end of this line we can just tack on and call a method named Find.
Find is the Mongo DB way of saying read or load.
We want to find data in the database.
Now, later on in this course, we will learn how to include an argument within these parentheses.
If we wanted to find only specific data, for example, if we were running a pet adoption website within
these find parentheses, we could say only find the dogs or only find the cats that are under the age
of three.
Right.
This is where you can build a query.
But in our case right now, we just want to find any and all documents in this collection.
And in that case, you can just leave these find parentheses blank.
OK, now, finally, at the end of this line, we want to tack on and call one more method dot.
And the method is named to array.
This method is extremely helpful.
So Mongu DB is going to find all of the documents in our collection, but the data that it finds is
only going to be meaningful to the Mongo DB system, meaning the data is going to be in a format that
is not easily read by humans and is not easy to work with with JavaScript.
So this two array method is going to convert that data into a super easy to work with JavaScript array.
Now within the parentheses for this to array method, it's expecting a function as an argument and it's
going to call that function whenever this database action completes, because, again, we don't know
if it's going to take two milliseconds or two thousand milliseconds, but let's go ahead and spell out
what we want to happen when the data is ready.
So within these parentheses, let's include an anonymous function, function, parentheses, curly brackets.
Let's dropdown in the parentheses right after the word function here.
Let's include two parameters.
Let's call the first IRR for error, comma, and let's call the second one items.
In the future, we can learn how to leverage the error parameter to make sure that there was not an
error reading from the database.
But in this simplistic lesson, we're just interested in the second parameter, which is going to be
a JavaScript array of all of our items from the database.
So this method is going to pass that data into our function as this parameter, which means we have
access to all of our database data from within the body of our function here.
So what do we do next?
Well, I'm a big fan of visualizing the data or seeing the data with my own two eyes before figuring
out what my next step should be.
So let's do this type this out with me within the body of our function just does a test.
Let's log our items parameter to the console so we can visually see what kind of data we're dealing
with.
So console dot log inside the.
Parentheses, let's just go with our items parameter.
Now let's go ahead and save our file and take it for a test drive if your node server or app is not
already running.
Be sure to go to your command line and fire it up by running the command NPM run watch.
OK, and we can test out this code that we just wrote by sending a request to the home page, you are
out.
In other words, if you go to your browser and just refresh localhost three thousand, that will trigger
that new code that we just wrote.
So if we jump back to the command line, we see that this was logged to the console.
So when it comes to our items parameter, what are we dealing with?
Well, it's an array and each item in the array is a JavaScript object.
So all we need to do now is incorporate the value of the text property for each item in this array into
the HTML that we send back to the visitor.
Right.
We just need to intertwine this data and these values into this big HTML template.
So let's do this.
Now that we know what this items parameter contains, let's get rid of this console log line so the
body of our function is now empty again.
Now what we want to do is move or cut and paste this response or send code to live within the body of
our function.
Right.
Because we don't want to send back our response until this data base action has had a chance to complete.
So to cut and paste this response, send code into the body of this function, I'm just going to place
my cursor right at the start of that response dot send line.
And then I want you to scroll down all the way to the bottom of this HTML template.
And right after the closing back and the closing parentheses, hold shift on your keyboard and then
just click right there.
So that selects that.
And let's cut it into our clipboard.
OK, and now within the body of our function here, right, we're console dialogue was just 10 seconds
ago.
Let's go ahead and paste our clipboard.
OK, so now this is the same HTML template that we've had for quite a while, only now we have this
magical items parameter that we can intertwine into the template.
So all we need to do is find the spot in the HTML template where these list items live, and then replace
this fake hard coded data of fake example item with the real dynamic data from our items parameter.
Let's start setting that up right now.
So back in our code, let's start digging through this HTML template to find the unordered list where
those list items should live.
So after the opening body tag, we see a heading level one.
This is the area for the form that the user can submit.
And right below that area we see an unordered list opening tag.
So we just want to hollow out the contents of this unordered list with real data right within this unordered
list.
Here is the first list item.
There are three overall list items because there are three fake static items within this first list
item here.
We can see that fake hardcoded data, right.
Fake example, item number one.
So here's what I want you to do.
I want you to copy this first list item.
It should be about seven lines worth of code.
And I want you to copy that into your clipboard.
This way.
We have a template of how things should look visually.
OK, once that's in your clipboard, I actually want us to delete all of the list items that live within
this unordered list.
Scroll down so I will select all three of the littlest items and delete.
So now we just have a hollowed out unordered list, right?
The opening tag in the closing tag.
Now, check this out in between the opening and closing tag, type this out with me.
Dollar sign curly brackets, because we are within a template, literal meaning because this entire
HTML template is wrapped in back ticks instead of simple quotes, we can use dollar symbol in curly
brackets to do something dynamic within this overall larger string of text.
Now within these curly brackets, let's begin working with our items parameter.
Now remember, we know that this is an array of JavaScript objects.
And as we learned back in the ten days of JavaScript, all arrays have access to a method named map.
So let's say dot map to call that method.
And to refresh your memory, the map method will return a new array that we can create based on this
original array.
This is a really convenient way of looping through this array and doing something once for each item
in it.
Now, within the parentheses of map, we give it a function that it's going to call once for each item
in the array.
So inside these parentheses, let's say function, parentheses, curly brackets, this dropdown, OK,
now whatever we return within this function is what's going to get added on to the newly generated array.
So check this out.
If we just return a string of text that says hello and then go ahead and save that and then refresh
our Web app in the browser, we see three Hallowes.
That's because there are three documents in our database collection right by graps.
Walk the dog and buy coffee.
Now, we don't actually want the word hello here.
We would want the value that got saved into the database.
However, before we worry about that, you'll notice that there are commas in between each item.
This is because by default, that's how JavaScript handles the automatic conversion of an array into
a string of text.
Right, because our code is living within a template literal.
When JavaScript sees the array that the map method is going to return, it's going to automatically
try to convert that array into a string of text.
Now, we don't want these awkward commas in between each item.
So check this out right after this.
Closing parentheses for the map method.
But right before this closing curly bracket in between that we can say DOT join in parentheses to call
the join method.
The join method will let us convert an array into a string of text in between the parentheses.
We can control what is placed in between each item by default.
It's a comma, but if we just include an empty pair of quotes with nothing in between them, not even
a space.
Well, now if we save and refresh in the browser, cool.
Now there is nothing in between each of our items.
So now instead of simply the word hello, let's just generate a little bit of each HTML for each item.
This is where we're going to paste in our clipboard.
So instead of returning the word hello, get rid of the quotes and hello instead, let's return a template
literal so to back ticks again.
That's right above your tab key or to the left of the one key.
And in between the back ticks, I want you to paste in your clipboard.
Remember, that was the HTML template to create a list item and that's going to have the edit buttons
and delete buttons and all we really need to swap out is this FAQ example, item number one text.
Right.
Instead of this, we would want the actual text value that got saved into the database for the current
item.
So check this out within the parentheses for our function that the map method is calling within these
parentheses, let's include a parameter.
The name doesn't matter, but let's call it item, because each time the map method calls our function,
it's going to pass into it the current item from the original array.
So now we can use this parameter of item right here.
Let's get rid of this fake example.
Item number one and in its place, let's do something dynamic.
So let's delete that and say dollar sign curly brackets in between the curly brackets.
We want to use that parameter that represents the current item in the array.
And then remember earlier when we saw the data log to the console, we saw that each item had a property
of IDE, but also a property of text.
And that's the property that we're interested in.
OK, with this in place, let's go ahead and save this file and then refresh in the browser.
Awesome, we see our real living, breathing data pulled in from the database now, before we bring
this lesson to a close, let's streamline our application a bit currently if we add a new item.
So if I say feed the cat and submit, it takes us to this awkward screen that says thanks for submitting.
And then we would have to manually go back to localhost in the address bar or click the back button.
Right, and then I would have to refresh to actually see that new item, let's improve things a bit,
let's set it up.
So as soon as you submit this form instead of sending you to that thank you screen, it just redirects
you to this same home page.
So then you would just immediately see the new item.
Let me show you what I mean.
So back in our code, I want you to scroll down to the very bottom of this file.
So here we see the area where we tell our server what to do if it receives a post request to this you
URL.
And here's what we're going to change instead of this response.
Dot, send the line.
I want you to delete that.
And in its place, then the body of this function just say response or R.
S and look inside it for a method named redirect.
Within these parentheses, we specify where we want to redirect the visitor to.
So let's just say quotes forward slash to represent the home page or the base.
You are out.
OK, let's go ahead and save that and take it for a test drive.
So if I refresh the homepage and let me create a new item, actually, first, let me zoom out a bit
so we can see when the item gets added down at the bottom.
OK, so maybe I will type in drink water and now as soon as I submit, it redirects me to that same
page and you can see it gets added down here.
Drink water.
Cool.
And that's going to bring this lesson to a close.
If we think about the CRUD acronym, so far we've taken care of creating, we've taken care of reading.
Now in our next lesson, let's take care of updating.
Right.
What if you want to edit or update the value of one of our existing items?
Let's keep our momentum rolling and I will see you in the next lesson.